रुचिरकम्पितकुण्डलमण्डल: सुचिरमीश ननर्तिथ पन्नगे ।
अमरताडितदुन्दुभिसुन्दरं वियति गायति दैवतयौवते ॥१॥
रुचिर-कम्पित-	beautifully quivering
कुण्डल-मण्डल:	the ear ornaments
सुचिरम्-ईश	for long O Lord!
ननर्तिथ पन्नगे	(Thou) danced on the serpent's (hoods)
अमर-ताडित-	the gods beat
दुन्दुभि:-सुन्दरम्	the drums sweetly
वियति गायति	in the skies sang
दैवत-यौवते	the celestial damsels
O Lord! With Thy ear ornaments quivering rhythmically, Thou danced for long on the hoods of the serpent. As the gods in the sky beat the drums, the heavenly damsels sang in accompaniment.
नमति यद्यदमुष्य शिरो हरे परिविहाय तदुन्नतमुन्नतम् ।
परिमथन् पदपङ्करुहा चिरं व्यहरथा: करतालमनोहरम् ॥२॥
नमति यत्-यत्-	drops down that which
अमुष्य शिर:	his (Kaaliya's) head (hoods)
हरे	O Hari!
परिविहाय तत्-	leaving that
उन्नतम्-उन्नतम्	the raised raised one
परिमथन् पद्-पङ्करुहा	trampling by Thy feet lotus like
चिरं व्यहरथा:	for long (Thou) played around
करताल-मनोहरम्	clapping beautifully
O Hari! Thou played around for long, leaving the drooped down head and jumping on the raised ones. Thus Thou trampled hood after hood with Thy lotus feet. Thou danced around in this manner keeping time with the clapping of hands beautifully.
त्वदवभग्नविभुग्नफणागणे गलितशोणितशोणितपाथसि ।
फणिपताववसीदति सन्नतास्तदबलास्तव माधव पादयो: ॥३॥
त्वत्-अवभग्न-	(when) by Thee crushed
विभुग्न-फणागणे	and so drooping were the many hoods
गलित-शोणित-	(when) the flowing blood
शोणित-पाथसि	made red the waters
फणिपतौ-अवसीदति	the serpent king got exhausted,
सन्नता:-तत्-अबला:-	prostrated his wives
तव माधव पादयो:	(at) Thy, O Maadhava, two feet
The group of hoods were crushed by Thee and were drooping. The blood flowing from them rendered the waters of Yamunaa red. The serpent king was totally exhausted. Thereupon, O Maadhava! His wives prostrated at Thy two feet in all humility.
अयि पुरैव चिराय परिश्रुतत्वदनुभावविलीनहृदो हि ता: ।
मुनिभिरप्यनवाप्यपथै: स्तवैर्नुनुवुरीश भवन्तमयन्त्रितम् ॥४॥
अयि पुरा-एव	O Lord! Even long ago
चिराय परिश्रुत-	for a long time, having well heard of
त्वत्-अनुभाव-	Thy greatness
विलीन-हृद: हि	with their immersed hearts, indeed,
ता: मुनिभि:-अपि-	they, by the sages even
अनवाप्य-पथै:	unattained ways
स्तवै:-नुनुवु:-	with (such) hymns praised
ईश	O Lord
भवन्तम्-अयन्त्रितम्	Thee, unrestricted
O Lord! Long ago, and for a long time the serpent wives had well heard of Thy majestic greatness. And so their minds were absorbed in Thee. Without any restrain, they hailed Thee with hymns of praises of a kind which are beyond the powers of even great sages.
फणिवधूगणभक्तिविलोकनप्रविकसत्करुणाकुलचेतसा ।
फणिपतिर्भवताऽच्युत जीवितस्त्वयि समर्पितमूर्तिरवानमत् ॥५॥
फणि-वधू-गण-	the serpent wives'
भक्ति-विलोकन-	devotion seeing
प्रविकसत्-करुणा-	with overflowing compassion
आकुल-चेतसा	filling Thy mind
फणिपति:-भवता-	the serpent king by Thee
अच्युत	O Achyuta!
जीवित:-त्वयि	let to live, unto Thee
समर्पित-मूर्ति:-	surrendering himself
अवानमत्	prostrated
O Achyuta! Thy heart was overflowing with compassion on seeing the devotion of the serpent wives. With Thy mind welled with such compassion Thou let the serpent king live, who then surrendering himself unto Thee, prostrated before Thee.
रमणकं व्रज वारिधिमध्यगं फणिरिपुर्न करोति विरोधिताम् ।
इति भवद्वचनान्यतिमानयन् फणिपतिर्निरगादुरगै: समम् ॥६॥
रमणकं व्रज	to Ramanaka (island) go
वारिधि-मध्यगं	(situated) in the ocean's centre
फणि-रिपु:-न करोति	the enemy of the snakes (Garuda) will not do
विरोधिताम् इति	enmity', thus
भवत्-वचनानि-	Thy words
अतिमानयन्-	respectfully obeying
फणपति:-निरगात्-	the serpent king departed
उरगै: समम्	the other serpents along with
Thou then told him to go to the Ramanaka island situated in the centre of the ocean. There the enemy of the snakes, Garuda would not do him any harm. Respectfully obeying these words of Thine, the serpent king departed along with the other snakes.
फणिवधूजनदत्तमणिव्रजज्वलितहारदुकूलविभूषित: ।
तटगतै: प्रमदाश्रुविमिश्रितै: समगथा: स्वजनैर्दिवसावधौ ॥७॥
फणिवधूजन-	the serpent wives
दत्त-मणिव्रज-	gave (Thee) many gems
ज्वलित-हार-	making resplendent the necklaces
दुकूल-विभूषित:	and by silk garments adorned
तट-गतै:	on the banks who were (waiting)
प्रमदाश्रु-विमिश्रितै:	with joyful tears mingling (sight)
समगथा: स्वजनै:-	Thou went with Thy folk
दिवस-अवधौ	at the day's end (evening)
The serpent wives gifted Thee many gems, resplendent necklaces and silk garments. Adorned with these, towards evening, Thou joined Thy folk, who were waiting for Thee on the banks with their sights mingled with joyful tears, and went with them.
निशि पुनस्तमसा व्रजमन्दिरं व्रजितुमक्षम एव जनोत्करे ।
स्वपति तत्र भवच्चरणाश्रये दवकृशानुररुन्ध समन्तत: ॥८॥
निशि पुन:-तमसा	(when) in the night, again because of darkness
व्रज-मन्दिरं	to the Vraja houses
व्रजितुम्-अक्षम	to go were unable
एव जनोत्करे	certainly, the group of people
स्वपति तत्र	(they) were sleeping there
भवत्-चरण-आश्रये	in Thy feets' shelter
दवकृशानु:-	a forest fire
अरुन्ध समन्तत:	surrounded all around
In the darkness of the night the group of people were unable to go back to their houses in Vraja. So they were sleeping there on the banks in the shelter of Thy feet. Just then they were engulfed by a forest fire.
प्रबुधितानथ पालय पालयेत्युदयदार्तरवान् पशुपालकान् ।
अवितुमाशु पपाथ महानलं किमिह चित्रमयं खलु ते मुखम् ॥९॥
प्रबुधितान्-अथ	who were awakened then
पालय पालय-इति-	save, save us thus
उदयत्-आर्त-रवान्	raising piteous tones
पशुपालकान्	the cowherds
अवितुम्-आशु	to protect, quickly
पपाथ महानलम्	(Thou) drank the great fire
किम्-इह चित्रम्-	what here is surprising
अयम् खलु	this (fire) is indeed
ते मुखम्	Thy mouth
The Gopas were awakened and raised piteous tones of 'save us, save us', in alarm. To quickly protect them, Thou drank in that great fire. What is so surprising in this? Thy mouth, indeed, is fire itself.
शिखिनि वर्णत एव हि पीतता परिलसत्यधुना क्रिययाऽप्यसौ ।
इति नुत: पशुपैर्मुदितैर्विभो हर हरे दुरितै:सह मे गदान् ॥१०॥
शिखिनि वर्णत: एव	in the fire by colour only
हि पीतता	indeed is yellowness (Peetataa)
परिलसति-अधुना	it exists now
क्रियया-अपि-असौ	as an action (Peetataa) also in this (fire)
इति नुत:	thus praised
पशुपै:-मुदितै:-	by the cowherds (who were) delighted
विभो	O All pervading Lord!
हर हरे	eradicate, O Hari!
दुरितै: सह	along with the sins
मे गदान्	my ailments
The yellowness 'Peetataa' was only an adjective of fire. By Thy having drunk it, it has also acquired the verb adjective of Peetataa, to be drunk. O All pervading Lord! The delighted cowherds thus praised Thee. O Hari! Deign to eradicate my ailments along with my sins.